This episode is sponsored by
Datadog a cloud monitoring platform
built by engineers for engineers,
enabling full stack observability for
modern applications. Datadog integrates seamlessly
to gather metrics and events
for more than 400 technologies,
including cloud providers, databases, and
web servers, easily identify slow
running queries, error rates, bottlenecks,
and more fast with built
in dashboards, algorithmic alerts and,
and, and request tracing and
log management. Datadog helps engineering
teams troubleshoot and collaborate together
in one place to enhance
performance and prevent downtime. Start
a free trial today and
Datadog will send you a
free t-shirt visit data dog
hq.com/hansel minutes. That's Datadog hq.com/hansel
minutes to get started. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman. This
is another episode of Hansel
minutes today. I'm talking with
Jeremy, some clarity windows and
insiders MVP and internet person.
How are you Jeremy? I'm
doing great. How are you
doing? I'm getting there as
much as anyone can be
right now. I have been
watching you on Twitter for
a very long time. We've
hung out a number of
times as well. And you
really like your surface pro
X. Now I'm surfaced, you
know, I'm surfaced all up
left and right. I've got
all kinds of services, but
what is so special about
these surface pro X? Well,
this surface pro X, it
is the first surface device
that Microsoft offered that runs
completely on arm 64. So
we have a windows 10
arm, 64 device that is
surface branded. So I remember
when everything was X 86,
which is Intel X, zero
X 86. There was three
86 and 46. And then
there was a time when
we were going from 32
bit to 64 bit. And
I don't think that a
lot of users notice that
time. A lot of devs
had like recompiled things, but
when I'm on my Intel
machine and I'm running a
32 bit process or a
64 week process, I don't
really think about stuff too
much. Like I don't, I
don't think that anyone anymore
thinks about it. And now
64 bit on Intel is
pretty much a standard deal,
but arm that's a whole
other universe, right? This is
an Intel chip. This is
a totally different architecture. Is
that correct? Yes, absolutely. This
the arm system on chip
SOC, it's a risk processor.
So you have that reduced
instruction, just kind of like
the power PC. If you
think about that, the Intel's
the exit he sakes. Those
are all complex, complex instructions.
The biggest difference I can
see between the arm and
the Intel processors is that
you have the low power
efficiency that the arm provides.
So I understand that Intel
has their expertise, and this
is a bit of a
generalization. And the kind of
things we're going to talk
about here are kind of
generalizations, but Intel's expertise is
just design. You know, the
basically high, high performance processors,
their goal is perf perf
perf, right? Desktop and server,
but arm has only ever
focused on power efficient. Like
that's, their whole thing is
let's be efficient with power.
It's almost like arm fundamentally
sees computing differently from Intel.
Correct. And what I believe
by that is by focusing
on that low power standpoint,
there's going to be a
lot more optimization. You're going
to get a lot more
done without pulling a lot
of energy from the processors.
And a lot of the
arm system chips don't even
have fans in them because
they're meant to be that
low power, but get a
lot of that performance out
of it. Interesting. Okay. So
you're saying that like, well,
we are trying to figure
out ways to make fans
quieter and like surface. Like
I have a surface pro
three, which is quite a
bit older. It's several years
old, but it's got a
tiny little fan and there's
all kinds of discussion about
the vents and how the
fans work. This surface pro
X didn't even have a
fan. Did you mean that
there's just no concept, cause
it's just not how it
works. I need a fan.
Correct. And then another wonderful
thing about this. If you
think about arm, arm 64,
the phones that you have,
they're running arm 64. Think
about the battery life you're
getting out of that. Get
out of your phones, your
iPhone, your Android phones. You're
going to have that same
similar performance on here. Mm
okay. So someone once called
the, the arm arm basically
is the architect of the
smartphone, the smartphone era. I
think that was a quote
in the verge. Basically. They
kind of thought about and
invented the idea of mobile
system on a chip, like
put everything on a chip,
shove it into a tiny
device that requires all day
battery life and no fan.
So these are phone chips,
but phones then are becoming
computers in our pockets. Yeah.
And if you think about
something that I've seen happened
in quite a few times,
phones being used for full
movie and audio production, I
think a lot, a lot
of the DJs and music
producers, most of the time
they're carrying around mobile sized
devices. They're not carrying around
full laptops and food desktops
anywhere. They have their mobile
devices with them because a
lot of that, a lot
of the audio code and
people have seen how efficient
everything is. So that's like,
why carry around this beefing
machine when we have all
of our code optimized just
for this. Yeah. We've seen
people do like entire albums
on, you know, garage band
or make us small, or
even, I think they've done
a number of movies in
the theaters that have been
done entirely on unlike I
movie. So certainly the, the
idea that a phone can't
do something major, like those
things are those days are
over. But I remember that
there was a couple of
devices where Microsoft tried to
make it. So you could
plug in a phone to
a giant monitor and like
run the whole run the
whole thing. What was that?
I don't remember what that
was called, but during the
windows phone, 10 era, there
was an idea that you
would carry the, the phone
would become your computer basically.
Yeah, Yeah. That, Oh, this
is bringing me back the,
yeah. Windows 10 mobile, a
continuum. That was the device.
I mean, that was that
the function. And I actually
feel like that was maybe
a preview of what we
could expect with the windows
on arm. So windows on
arm means not windows phone
10. It means literally the
windows 10 that I'm already
using home or pro or
whatever on an arm device,
but not necessarily a phone
sized device. The surface pro
X is, is tiny though.
It's like the it's like
basic, it's the size. It's
almost basically an iPad. It's
a size and this and
weight of an iPad, but
it's a full piece. Yep,
absolutely. It's the, it's the
full OOS. So many of
the functionalities that you'd be
able to have on your,
whatever your surface pro or
surface six, seven, all of
those you'll be able to
do this on the windows
on arm. So I can
actually run WSL on here,
for instance, The windows subsystem
for Linux. So you could,
which is which, which uses
a virtual immuno. It uses
hyper V and a number
of virtualization technology. So you
can kind of go nuts.
So you, do you use
yours as a development machine
Actually do that? I think
from talking to many people,
that's been one of the
first things they do. If
they get an arm device,
first thing they do is,
well, let's see a visual
studio runs on here. So
you can guess that was
the first thing that I
did was download and run
visual studio there And agreed
at work though, because visual
studio isn't arm compiled, It
actually did work because of
some, some awesome things that
the Microsoft teams have done
to make that possible. There
is a  emulation layer
that runs on the arm
64. So you'll be able
to run x86 binaries only
exited six though, not X
64. Okay. Interesting here. So
hang on. So there's, this
is an arm 64 chip,
not an arm 32. And
you can run, I assume,
arm 32 things as a
kind of an emulation as
well. So just like I
was mentioning before my 64,
but Intel machine, my desktop
that I'm talking to you
on right now, so it
can certainly run 32 bit
apps and that works fine.
And I don't really think
about it. And this arm,
64 version of windows 10
uses a, a layer. It's
not a virtual machine though.
It's a, it's an emulation
layer. So it's, it's literally
absorbing those, those instructions for
X 86, converting them in
real time onto arm. It's
lying to the app and
telling it that this is
an x86 and, and it
works. Yep, absolutely. That's that's,
that's why you would typically
see as an alternative to
the lack of arm 64
binaries, if there's an X
96 binary, they say, Hey,
just use this where it's
the performance of that exit
six simulation layer is it's
okay. You didn't sound enthusiastic
when you said, okay. Yeah,
it's, I'll say it's better.
And I'm going to give
a comparison to my first
arm, 64 device. It was
my, a Seuss Nova go.
And I got a bill
in 2018, the exit he
six emulation on that was
pretty abysmal because it had
a Snapdragon eight 35, which
was the same processor, the
processor that's in my razor
phone, which interestingly enough, it's
running visual studio on that.
Just be prepared to suffer
because there's a lot of
processes going on as a
lot of sub processes. Ah,
that's interesting. The more exit
six processes you're running at
the same time. And if
there's anything that's dependent on
that, just goodbye, the body
or performance. Okay. So let
me think about this for
a second. So this is
a device, it's a great
idea. The idea of an
arm 64 device means a
fabulous low power arc, you
know, architected for low power
at the very beginning device,
a device that gives you
all day or darn near
all day battery life. But
if I start using that
device to exclusively run 32
bit applications on an emulator,
especially complicated ones that fan
out, like you said, the
visual studios and example is
kind of like the torture
device, you know, the torture
example because it's like dozens
of, of processes that fork
out and fork out. Cause
it's not one app it's
dozens of little apps that
all talk together. Then at
that point, I'm really not
getting, I'm not using the
device kind of in the
way it was intended. It's
great that it works that
way, but I'm going to
probably not get awesome battery
life and I'm not going
to get awesome perf and
it's not going to make
the device really shine. Correct.
Yeah. And that's, and it's
really, like I said, it's
the complexity of the x86
app that determines your level
of performance, like say for,
for existence, Microsoft teams actually
runs pretty well. There's been
a lot of optimization and
I can really kind of
attribute it to the improvements
that were done on the,
I guess they've video performance.
And a lot of that
plus we've had firmware updates
for the pro X made
the experience amazing. So they're
really actively trying to make
this thing awesome. Like it's
getting updated regularly. Oh yeah.
Which is, which is really
nice. I mean, there's obviously
there are bugs, which they're
random, but the biggest thing
I try to remind everyone
to do is if you
encounter any random bug, add
it to the feed hub,
the feedback hub, the feedback
hub app. Yeah. Yep. That's
I can say that every
single time I run into
something that's out of the
ordinary, I throw it in
there and I make sure
that I do the biggest
amount of detail in there.
Just so the engineers can
understand what I was doing
at that time, because I
want this stuff to ext
to, I want this to
run completely flawless. Yeah. Definitely.
People are paying a lot
of attention to that kind
of stuff. And this has
only been six months since
the device came out. So
certainly now, but at the
same time though, like I
always thought that they should
have called it like not
windows 10 arm or windows
10 on arm, I would
have called it. And this
is just me making this
up. But I would have
called it windows 10 all
day office. Because the thing
that I like about the,
the surface pro X is
that it will be basically
ruined forever. If you don't
throw a bunch of ambulation
stuff at it, right. Like
if you think it's the
perfect all day machine for
dev and all you're going
to do is emulate an
x86. It's probably not for
you. It sounds like if
you were in a native
arm though, stuff it'll just
run forever, which is pretty
cool. Oh yes. And for
instance, the first thing I
did was download the new
Microsoft edge. That's chromium based
and put it right on
this laptop. Well, I call
it a laptop, but my
arm 64 pro X device,
because, and everyone there's been
jokes for years about anything
Chrome related, how it just
loves to eat your memory.
So imagine running that a
full base CR full chromium
based browser on x86 it's,
you'll see the complete difference
between the exit six version
and an arm, 64 version.
There's many times where I
could actually, and this might
be just my own opinion,
but I've seen ex ex
86 run a horrible why?
Well, the arm 64 version
of these browsers run better
than my ex 64 based
Dell. Really? Yeah. I've I
usually have a good 20,
30 tabs open at any
given time. And I have
really no issue Better mean
to you. Like I think
that one of the things
that's hard when trying to
explain to people the difference
between this arm machine and
a, a comparative Intel machine
is the sense of it's
it runs better. I mean,
there's no fan, it is
efficient and it is crisp
and you click and things
happen instantly. So you're saying
better. How can you be
more kind of quantitative about
it? And yeah, it's, it's
really kind of better depending
on what you're doing. I
put browsing in there as
an example, because I've seen
most people when they're on
their devices, whether it be
a laptop, desktop tablet, you're
going to have your browser.
That experience is significantly better
than what I'm seeing on
my work machine that has
32 gigs of Ram and
eight core Intel processor. It's
it feels like it's those
tiny wins, but at the
same time, you still have
to it still going to
have to think about the
level of complexity because on
these devices, you're going to
be running a full blown,
super video game. Like, Oh
no, I'll bring up an
old example, like a crisis.
Well, our gears of war,
right? I mean, unless gears
of war was a native
arm app though, this isn't
what this is for. Right.
I think when I first
got a pro X, I
thought this was supposed to
be the perfect computer. Like
with this solves everything in
the sense of this is
going to be as high
powered as my desktop. And
it was going to be
everything that my Intel was
and more, and I think
I got my head wrong
about that, because like we
said, at the beginning, Intel
makes high performance server desktop
machines, but our makes power
efficient processes from the beginning.
And this is a really
grown up phone processor. That's
a system on a chip
and my expectation wasn't reasonable
and it wasn't correct. Cause
that's not what this is
for. Correct. And that's, and
that's why there's been that
example from the beginning to
say, Hey, this can do
a lot of stuff. It's
really great for productivity, but
don't expect to use it
as a gaming machine, which
makes sense. Right. And I
think that, you know, as
these, as the processors, you
know, gain more complexity because
have just the chains between
a Snapdragon eight 35 to
this Microsoft P one based
off of the Qualcomm Snapdragon,
ACX the difference, the difference
between the performances insane. Like,
and I think the more
complex, the more that we
see the evolution of the
arm based processors, I feel
like it's going to get
to that point of being
a true contender. Cause I've,
I've done the, the geek
bench was a kink bench,
four or five on this
pro X in, it was
comparative to an I five.
Yeah. That's interesting. That's like
the, the benchmarks that they
do on iPads and stuff,
when they're trying to show
like an iPad, I don't
think it is comparable to
a PC, but if you
take a, a benchmark that
is a, a browser based
benchmark, and you say, if
you spend, you know, most
of your time, 60, 70,
80% of your time in
a browser, it is comparable
and you can get a
lot of really significant work
done. Yes. And I, and
I think that's, that's where
you get a lot of
those wins. But I do
believe that I think O
S wise, as, as windows
gets more armed, 64 binaries
out there, and as the
OSTP itself continues, get optimized.
This may not be a
problem. That's a good think
about it. You've seen like
arm 64 has been out
since about 2010, not implemented,
but you know, the RVA
does that spec has been
there and Linux has been
on it since then. So
like 2013, I think you
started to see your first
Linux-based build of an arm,
64 target in there. There's
a lot of stuff running
on Linux arm, 64 out
there. Yeah. We're seeing a
movement of arm, not just
from the phone, but up
into the cloud as well.
The idea of this power
efficient processor means that if
I could do a, you
know, a.net web app and
run it on arm in
the cloud and not even
think about the fact that
it's written on our arm,
if it just works, then
you know, the entire data
center could be more power
efficient. And that could cause
potentially say, I don't know,
millions of dollars because we're
not using as much power
to, to keep to, or
cooling to, to run the
cloud. So I think there's
a really interesting thing to
be said there as well.
There's a, now we're going
to have products Again. Yeah.
And I think that's, that's,
that's really great because especially
as a.net developer, I know
the latest.net five previews, there's
an S STK targets arm
64 on windows. So I've
been actually able to compile
full on.net core apps and
they work. So console ASP,
net core. And for right
now WinForms, there is WinForms
support in the latest dotnet
five previews, at least from
the, the latest bleeding edge
version, which I think would
be towards like a preview
five ish or even pre
before I have to look
again. But yeah, there's, I
have been creating WinForms apps
and they've worked flawlessly that
that's, what's blowing on mine.
When you need to focus
on building, do you want
to get bogged down by
your database? Mongo DB is
an intuitive, flexible document database
that lets you get to
building Mongo. DBS document model
is a natural way to
represent data so you can
focus on what matters Mongo
DB Atlas is the best
way to use Mongo DB.
It's a global cloud database
service that gives you all
of the developer productivity of
Mongo DB. Plus the added
simplicity of a fully managed
database service. You can get
started free with Mongo DB
atlas@mongodb.com Slash Atlas. I was
looking at your blog here
and you've got a blog
post from February where you
compiled the asp.net core runtime
for arm windows, arm 64.
And there's already a Linux
arm and Lennox arm 64.
So folks have been able
to use asp.net and.net on
raspberry pies with success for
a long time, I've got
a number of raspberry PI,
and I've been talking about
that for years, but it
doesn't look like you had
to do a whole lot
to recompile that you basically
made your own runtime identifier
and just compiled it all
with, with open it with
existing tools. Did that take
a lot of effort to
get Donna core running on
arm 64 on windows? Yeah,
it took, it took a
while because at that time,
which I guess this is
my fault for not updating
the blog. That that process
is actually the amount of
complexity of that process is
essentially gone the better for
you now. Yeah. the.net team
has done so much, but
it was a lot of
trial and error on my
part because it's the first
time I even brought down
the entire Danette core source.
Cause so for me, trying
to make this run and
build natively, I gained some
experience with looking through the.net
source and getting an understanding
for how that process works.
Were you impressed? Was that
it was that like, were
you surprised at all? Cause
I know that Microsoft always
talks about being able to
compile all of dotnet yourself
and you're just like, yeah,
I'm just gonna compile that
net for Toyota for processor.
And I actually could do
it. Like it was a
real thing. I was extremely
impressed because as soon as
I did it, I, I
had to run.net and I
made a simple ASP net
core app that just shows
the runtime of the binary
of whatever their host process.
And just to see that
arm 64, they're like, it
just blew my mind and
made me so happy because
currently when you're downloading anything
done at core related in
using it beef, it wants
everything wants to use x86
because you know, there's no
publicly available, I guess, general
release of the SDK for
arm 64. So trying to
compile something in the exit
86 version of.net versus the
arm 64, it is day
and night. Let me, let
me ask you this. Here's
a bit of a loaded
question. So I'm thinking about
two different people. There's you
who have the technical Ability
and patience to compile all
of.net for the processor that
you love. And then there's
maybe my nontechnical spouse. So
my nontechnical spouse gets a
surface pro ex they're going
to be able to install
office, install every app that
they want to run. I
mean, other than like obscure
low-level drivers and weird VPN
apps that might do something
custom, they're not going to
have any trouble running, whatever,
like nontechnical spouse can run,
whatever makes them happy on
one of these devices. Right.
But if you're a dev,
how much hunting around do
you usually do for an
arm native build of something
when you go, when you're
like, yeah, I'm going to
run edge. You said you've
got the arm build, you
know, how important is that?
And how much time do
you spend doing that? I
always go out searching on
the individual application. I go
searching to see if they
do have an arm 64
build. If it's open source,
first thing I try to
do is see, okay, how
can I make this cross
compile? I, you know, I
get down to that level
because it's more of a,
you know, a learning, learning
thing for me, but also
a way that I can
contribute back. But there's only
been really a few things
I've wanted to see. Well,
and I've wanted to natively
compiled arm 64, that weren't
there and well vs code
being one of them. And
there was a pull request
by rich Townsend that enabled
all of the prerequisites in
order to make a build
for I'm 64. And that's
what essentially, you know, became
the insiders with the few
tweaks to it without that
was the one thing I
did. I haven't compiled it.
Actually, the first thing I
did with the BS code
was I opened up windows,
subsystem for Linux. Got it.
Compiled there used VC X
surf, the do like X,
11 client or whatever to
see the actual gooey. So
I saw that Linux app
running on windows as system
for Lennox, the gooey on
my screen. And I was
dabbing in that. So it's
like that that's, that's where
a lot of the fun
things with having windows subsystem
for Linux works out. Cause
if there, if there's something
that I feel like, okay,
this, I don't need anything
windows specific from this, I
can just load up and
run within that little environment
and be done with it.
Like I said, there was
like, there was a little
trade off. There is like
the alternatives. Cause there is
like a for instance, I
think the windows on arm
only supports open GL one.one.
And that's, there's many things
that if it does support
open GL, what's not going
to be targeting one dot
wall. So there's that an
older thing? Yeah, that's a,
it's an older thing. But
the cool thing about this
is that I ran, I
ran like quake three, there
was like an opensource quake
three and I could not
get compiled properly yet. There
a lot of, you know,
weird things that I ran
into. I opened up windows.
So subsystem for Linux downloaded
the package and ran it
and I'm playing quake three
on my pro X And
it worked just fine out
of the box. Yep, absolutely.
So it sounds like, even
though, like I said, we're
just six months from the
release of this and it's
the beginning of windows are
on arm for the average
nontechnical Joe or Jane. It'll
just work for when edge,
edge has arm builds. The
new chromium based edge has
arm built available that you
can find. But at some
point that'll just work as
well. Like everyone will just
get the latest version. So
nontechnical spouse will have a
faster browser and they don't
have to do anything. I
know that visual studio code
insiders has arm builds. So
visual studio code itself will
compile directly on arm. It
seems like if more people
start using, you know, getting
arms stuff, it'll just happen.
Basically the machine will just
get faster and low battery
life will get longer because
X 86 compiled emulated apps
will slowly over the next
several months to a year,
be replaced with arm native
builds and everybody wins. Yeah.
I believe that then that's
one of my goals to
bring more awareness. Cause in
visual studio, it was like
back in 2018, we gain
the ability to easily target
arm 64. So for right
now, if you have a
C plus plus project, you
can easily add a target
from 64 and I'd say
99% of your builds will
just work. Cause there's been
that IX. You think about
C make and even rust.
There's all of those different
components have arm 64 native
compatibility. So a lot of
Dave's these big apps can
just be easily ported without
trouble. That's cool. It's amazing
to me, even that on
arm 64, that there's a
VHD ex chicken run hyper
V on these devices. Like
the idea that you have
on hyper V and windows
10 enterprise on a surface
pro ax running, you know,
this, this arm Snapdragon style
process, they idea that what's
effectively a giant phone with
all day battery life. It
has the ability to do
these kinds of things. It
sounds like you are a
big fan of this device.
I'm a, I'm a huge
fan and I, more than
anything, it's the first device
I pick up and I'm
on it the entire day.
So just about everything I'm
doing, even this recording is
done from my pro ex.
Oh, you're on it now.
Oh yeah. Oh wow. Okay.
And then you have like
what a USB mic plugged
in. Like you're just using
it. It's a PC it's
plugged into the, give it
on the dock and it's
on running two monitors. Yup.
I've I've done that. It's
it's amazing. I thought that
I was going to have
so much issues, but I
have, I've had none with
just replacing the device. That's
hooked up to my monitors.
I have, I do have
the first generation surface dock,
which still works flawlessly. I
even have a USBC to
USB converter and that's what
I'm using right now for
the mic. But even then
I have a, an Arturia
mini keyboard. I plugged it
into this and used FL
studio mobile. And I'm playing
this keyboard without any delay
can actually make music on
this borough. X sounds like
you're living the dream man.
Oh yeah. And that's that's
I try to find everything
that I can, that I
can do just to get
the best out of the
device. All right. Well, thanks
so much for chatting with
me today. I hope that
folks check out what's happening
in the arms space and
that this maybe has them
give a second look at
the surface pro X and
what's happening with arm on
windows. Thank you so much,
Jeremy Sinclair. Yeah. Thank you
so much, Scott. This has
been another episode of Hansel
minutes and we'll see you
again next week. .